This page lists some of the known issues at the time of the
[1.2.6](1.2.6 "wikilink") release.

# Cannot connect to any Mumble servers, "remote host closed connection"

This can happen due to a bad interaction between Mumble and Skype's
click-to-call feature. Please install the latest client update to Mumble
1.2.7 or greater to apply this fix. A special thanks to everyone at
Mumble.com/GameVox.com for troubleshooting and finding a fix fix this
issue over a four week timespan.

# Mumble on Windows may hang on some computers that use ASIO sound drivers

Some computers with ASIO sound drivers can cause Mumble 1.2.6 to hang on
startup. See the following bug for more information:
<https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/issues/1151>

For [1.2.5](1.2.5 "wikilink") release, we had a special binary built
without ASIO support available for download. This has not yet been built
for 1.2.6. If this is a problem, please report an issue.

# Global Shortcuts stop working randomly on Windows

For some setups, Mumble's global shortcuts will stop working at random
on Windows Vista, Windows 7 and Windows 8.

This is because Windows implements a timeout on mouse and keyboard
hooks, to ensure that crashed or hung applications cannot interfere with
mouse and keyboard input for the whole system. If a keyboard or mouse
hook exceeds this timeout, the hook will be silently removed by Windows.

Under some circumstances, Mumble's hook will exceed the default timeout
of 200 ms.

The timeout can be configured by changing the value of the following
registry key:

HKEY_CURRENT_USER\\Control Panel\\Desktop\\LowLevelHooksTimeout (it
does not exist by default)

This key should be of type DWORD, and its value is specified in
milliseconds.

You can also use this .reg file, which sets the timeout to 1 second
(which should be more than sufficient):
<http://mumble.info/reg/winhooks-1s-timeout.reg>

You will most likely have to reboot your computer after applying the
registry fix.

# Resizing the World of Warcraft window on Mac OS X can cause overlay crashes

The overlay shipped with Mumble 1.2.6 on Mac OS X will cause crashes
when used with World of Warcraft (both 32-bit and 64-bit).

The bug is triggered when World of Warcraft is run in windowed mode, and
the window is manually resized to be bigger.

We hope to release a fixed overlay installer when the bug is fixed. The
bug can be tracked at <https://sourceforge.net/p/mumble/bugs/986/>

# Murmur treats MySQL errors as fatal

Murmur treats SQL errors as fatal, and as such, will terminate when an
SQL error happens. This is not new behavior, but it is an inconvenience
for hosters, since an SQL error in one virtual host can deny service to
all other virtual servers hosted by the Murmur instance.

Steven Hartland has contributed a patch which makes Murmur treat SQL
errors as non-fatal to remedy the situation described above. The patch
has not yet been merged, and must be patched in manually.

The patch can be found at
<https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/pull/119>.

# Setting the suggestversion config option via Ice

The suggestversion config option, which will cause a server to suggest a
specific Mumble version for use on the server to its clients, has
differing behavior depending on the context in which it is set.

When set via murmur.ini, the suggestversion config option expects a
string, such as "1.2.6".

When set via Ice, the suggestversion config option must be set to a
bitmasked version number of the form (1 \<\< 16) + (2 \<\< 8) + 4.

This behavior is confusing for administrators. The issue is currently
tracked at <https://sourceforge.net/p/mumble/bugs/989/>, and a
preliminary patch is available at
<https://gist.github.com/fwaggle/584cf2a96002af9d0f64>.

[Category:Documentation
English](Category:Documentation_English "wikilink")