We released version 1.2.0 of Mumble on December 10, 2009. This release
uses a new protocol between the client and server, which means a 1.2.0
client is only compatible with 1.2.0 or newer servers, and a 1.1.8
client can't connect to a 1.2.0 server. The new protocol is designed to
be easily extended, so we should never have this problem again. If your
favorite server still runs 1.1.8 don't worry, 1.2.0 comes with a
backwards compatible client.

We have also integrated support for using
[CELT](http://www.celt-codec.org/) as a voice codec. This means higher
voice quality and even lower latency.

If you want to use 1.2.0, great, be sure to read the
[Upgrade](1.2.0_Upgrade "wikilink") information. Server owners might
also be interested in the [Server](1.2.0_Server "wikilink") article to
see what features the server gained.

## Screenshot

![Screenshot_mumble_1.2.0_my_mumble_full_snap.png](Screenshot_mumble_1.2.0_my_mumble_full_snap.png
"Screenshot_mumble_1.2.0_my_mumble_full_snap.png")

## New features

This is a summary of the new features we implemented for 1.2.0.

### Increased voice quality, decreased latency

![Screenshot_mumble_1.2.0_min_max_codec.png](Screenshot_mumble_1.2.0_min_max_codec.png
"Screenshot_mumble_1.2.0_min_max_codec.png") Mumble is now able to use a
new codec called [CELT](http://www.celt-codec.org/), which means 48khz
sampling rate, but most importantly reduced framesize to 10ms, half of
what it used to be. This results in better audio quality and an even
lower latency than with 1.1.8. Of course this also requires a bit of
additional bandwidth and because we wanted to conserve the great
performance [Speex](http://speex.org/) offered us in low bandwidth
situations we simply decided to get the best of both worlds. Mumble
automatically chooses the best codec for your quality and latency
settings and hence is able to work in high, as well as low bandwidth
environments.

### Certificate based authentication

![Certificate_wizard.png](Certificate_wizard.png
"Certificate_wizard.png") When starting Mumble for the first time, users
are guided through the process of generating a certificate. A
certificate uses strong public key cryptography to securely and uniquely
identify a user to a server without giving away any passwords or other
sensitive information. If the certificate is ever lost, the ability to
authenticate to servers will be lost, so making a backup is mandatory,
and part of the guided process. Users that already have secure
certificates will have the option to use these instead, and such a
trusted certificate can be replaced by any other trusted certificate for
the same user identity.

### User management

![register_context.png](register_context.png "register_context.png")
With certificate based authentication, many of the social engineering
attacks on password-based authentication are weakened. As such, we feel
it's safe to do user registration from the client. There are a few new
permissions possible, and one of them is the ability to rightclick and
register a connected user with the server.

Once registered, the user will be remembered by the server for the
future, and can be used in ACL lists and group memberships.

There is also the possibility to list existing users and unregister
users.

### New connect dialog

![unified_connect_mouseover.png](unified_connect_mouseover.png
"unified_connect_mouseover.png") For the new version we completely redid
our previous server browser. It is now able to display all the important
information about favourite, lan and public servers in one comprehensive
list. We also added additional important information like the ping of
the server or the number of users currently connected to it. Of course
you are able to use this information to filter and sort the list, for
example you could prevent empty servers from being displayed. We also
added drag and drop capability, if you want to connect to a server on
startup just drag it from the list to your desktop.

### Chatbar

![chatbar.png](chatbar.png "chatbar.png") Mumble is primarily meant to
be used for talking. Nevertheless it can be useful to be able to send a
quick message to someone. For this purpose we added the chatbar. Just
select the channel or user you want to send the message to and type
away. The bar is also able to complete usernames if you press
*Tabulator*, or to directly select the user for a private message with
*Control + Space*.

### Layout presets

![layout_presets.png](layout_presets.png "layout_presets.png") A lot of
users asked us if it was possible to change the way mumble places its
user interface elements, here is our answer: It is. This ability was
already present in version 1.1.8 and earlier though not many users knew
of it. For example if you place your mouse cursor on the top of the log
and wait for a short time a bar pops up, click on it and drag the whole
log where you want it to be. We realise that this is non trivial and
without being told about it or reading it somewhere you most probably
would not be able to find it. This is why we introduced layout presets.
The user has the possibility to easily switch between three very common
layouts directly from the options menu.

  - **Classic:** The standard layout all previous mumble releases
    shipped with (extended by the chatbar of course).
  - **Stacked:** A layout optimized for minimal horizontal space usage.
  - **Hybrid:** Same as classic but with the chatbar spanning the whole
    width of the window.



### Channel reordering

![channel_reordered.png](channel_reordered.png "channel_reordered.png")
One of the most bemoaned facts in the 1.1.X series was that channels
could not be ordered in any but alphabetical order. In 1.2 we fixed
this. Channels can now be reordered with drag and drop or a numerical
sort indicator. Channels with the same sort indicator will stay in
alphabetical order while channels with bigger indicators are placed
lower in the channel list.

### WYSIWYG Editor

![wysiwyg.png](wysiwyg.png "wysiwyg.png") For chat messages, comments,
channel descriptions and everything else that has to do with text in
Mumble we now introduced an easy to use **W**hat **Y**ou **S**ee **I**s
**W**hat **Y**ou **G**et editor for Richtext. This means you can color
text, add links and images with a few simple clicks.

### Comments

![comment_read.png](comment_read.png "comment_read.png") Based on
popular requests, both players and channels can now have comments
associated with them. Comments are shown in the tooltip for the channel
or player, and are stored persistently on the server.

### Friends

![context_add_friend.png](context_add_friend.png
"context_add_friend.png") You can now add players to your friends list.
Friends are recognized based on their certificate, so you will recognize
your friends even on other servers than where you first met. Friends can
be used as targets for whispering.

### Whisper

![talking_whisper.png](talking_whisper.png "talking_whisper.png") You
can now set up one-sided whispers. This will redirect your voice to a
set of players or channels. The possibilities are fairly large; for
example, you can whisper to "everyone in my parent channel, and all
channels linked to it, that are a member of the @admin group". You can
whisper to as many different "targets" as you want at the same time. The
picture you see on the left is the icon indicating that a player is
whispering to you.

### G15 for OSX

![g15helper.png](g15helper.png "g15helper.png") OSX now has full G15
support, which was the last missing feature on that platform.

### Native-feeling ConfigDialog on Mac OS X

![native-feeling-configdialog.png](native-feeling-configdialog.png
"native-feeling-configdialog.png") To better fit in with the look and
feel of Mac OS X, Mumble now sports a very native-feeling configuration
dialog on that platform.

### Automatic Plugin Update and Enhanced Plugin Support

![plugins_snip.png](plugins_snip.png "plugins_snip.png") As the number
of positional audio plugins increase, it has become a bit of a problem
that games are updated much more frequently than Mumble releases. There
is now a system to automatically update plugins, which means they'll be
installed as soon as they are available.

Also, plugins are now configured so that one only hears positional audio
from those who are playing the same game, and in some cases, only from
those in the same server and team, depending on the plugin.

### New Positional Audio Plugins

The following plugins have been added to Mumble 1.2.0:

  - Battlefield 2142 v1.50
  - Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 Multiplayer
  - Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 Special Ops
  - World of Warcraft (v3.2.2 Euro)
  - Manual placement plugin

### User textures

![user_texture.png](user_texture.png "user_texture.png") Custom
textures for the overlay can now be changed from within the client. User
textures were already present in 1.1.8 but as they had to be uploaded
into the server by other software many users do not know about them. The
picture uploaded to the server will be shown in the overlay of other
people instead of your name. This way you can easily figure out who is
talking without having to read the players name.

### Automatic network fallback

![Firewall.png](Firewall.png "Firewall.png") For clients that, for some
reason, have trouble getting UDP packets to and from the server, the
client will now detect this and automatically switch to TCP
compatibility mode. If things improve, it will switch back. This helps
people wo have bad behaving routers or are on restricted networks where
UDP packets cannot flow freely.

### Audio events

![sound_events.png](sound_events.png "sound_events.png") Instead of
events being announced to you by our Text-To-Speech system you can now
define custom audio files that play in this case. The system supports a
lot of common formats like .wav, .ogg or .flac.

### Access Tokens

![access_token_editor.png](access_token_editor.png
"access_token_editor.png") ACLs can now define rules for Token groups;
and anyone who knows the token will match the group. This can be used to
implement password-based channel access.

To set a token on a channel, simply add the token name preceded by \# as
a group in the ACL tab. Example: \#yourtoken

### Unified channel add/edit dialog

![edit_channel_simple.png](edit_channel_simple.png
"edit_channel_simple.png") Because of the many new features we
introduced for channels in the new version we decided to put all of them
into an easy to use dialog. It can be used to perform basic tasks like
renaming the channel, setting a description or a password. For
experienced users there is an advanced mode in which you can hand-tune
the ACL and Group settings for the channels yourself.

### Temporary Channels

![add_tmp_channel.png](add_tmp_channel.png "add_tmp_channel.png")
Temporary channels live only as long as there are users in them, and
automatically get deleted when the last users leaves. We expect to see a
lot of these on public servers as the capability to create them can be
given independently of normal channel creation rights.

### LAN announcement and discovery

![network-workgroup.png](network-workgroup.png "network-workgroup.png")
Mumble and Murmur now support [Bonjour](Bonjour "wikilink"), allowing
users on the same site to easily find local Murmur servers. As it uses
multicast, it even works across VLANs, making it great for LAN parties.
No more exchanging of IP addresses, just fire up Mumble and connect.

### Crash reporting

![crashreport.png](crashreport.png "crashreport.png") Mumble now has a
built in crash reporter, and will allow you to upload the crash directly
to the developers. With the complete crash data, it's much easier for us
to find and fix bugs.

### Compatibility client

![mumble11x.png](mumble11x.png "mumble11x.png") 1.2 will come with an
updated version of 1.1.8, we call it 1.1.X, which enables you to visit
servers which did not update to the new version yet. This client uses
the same audio backend and libraries as 1.2 so it fixes some problems
people reported with systems unsupported by Mumble 1.1.8 stable (like
Windows 7). We will eventually remove this client from the default
installer once we feel that the new protocol has spread wide enough in
our user base.

### Customizable PTT audio cue

![custom_ptt_cue.png](custom_ptt_cue.png "custom_ptt_cue.png") With
the new client you can now customize what sound mumble plays when you
push or release your push to talk key.

### And more

The changes listed here are the most interesting and visible ones. Of
course there were many more behind the curtains. If you really want to
know about every single change, there are over 1000 of them, we did for
1.2.0 you can see our complete repository logs
[here](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/commits).

[Category:Documentation
English](Category:Documentation_English "wikilink")
[Category:Releases](Category:Releases "wikilink")