Mumble 1.2.3, the successor of [1.2.2](1.2.2 "wikilink") has been
released on 19th February 2011.

## Screenshot

![Mumble_--_1.2.3.png](Mumble_--_1.2.3.png "Mumble_--_1.2.3.png")

## Mumble

List of new features, improvements and bug fixes already in place for
the upcoming release.

### Improved Voice Activity Detection

![Agraph.png](Agraph.png "Agraph.png") With 1.2.3 amplitude based voice
activity detection has been greatly improved. The biggest benefits are
expected for people using it in a noisy environment as the detection now
operates on noise filtered instead of raw audio data.

### Customizable Overlay with FPS counter

![overlay123_s.png](overlay123_s.png "overlay123_s.png") The overlay is
now highly customizable. Instead of only being able to control position
and size as in previous released you can now freely reorder, scale,
show/hide its components giving you the freedom to make it look just the
way you want it. It can also display additional useful information like
your Framerate (FPS).

### Recording

![recording123.png](recording123.png "recording123.png") Another long
awaited feature finally arrived in Mumble: Recording. Our recorder can
store in several widespread formats and supports Mixdown as well as
Multichannel recording ([see our blog for more
information](http://blog.mumble.info/for-the-record/)).

### Priority speaker

![priority_speaker.png](priority_speaker.png "priority_speaker.png") As
of popular request Mumble now has the ability to prioritize certain
speakers. Meaning that once a priority speaker starts talking all other
players in the channel are attenuated.

### New installer

![Mumble_1.2.3_Setup.png](Mumble_1.2.3_Setup.png
"Mumble_1.2.3_Setup.png") Mumble 1.2.3 has a new MSI based installer for
smoother installations and updates. Besides the new foundation the
installer also received new branding, we hope you like it.


\=== Other changes ===

  - Display of the full blown client user interface inside the overlay.
    On the Windows platform it is fully interactive just like the
    desktop client. (This feature is **EXPERIMENTAL**)

<!-- end list -->

  - Updated CELT Codec to version 0.11.0 which improves audio quality
    for low bandwidth settings [(CELT
    changes)](http://git.xiph.org/?p=celt.git)

<!-- end list -->

  - Optional auto reconnect to last used server

<!-- end list -->

  - The client is now able to operate in WASAPI exclusive mode. This
    drops the latency overhead of the audio output considerably but has
    the disadvantage that no other application can input/output sound
    from that device. ([see our blog for more
    information](http://blog.mumble.info/oh-no-weve-made-a-buzzword/))

<!-- end list -->

  - Tons of other
    [bugfixes/changes](http://mumble.git.sourceforge.net/git/gitweb.cgi?p=mumble/mumble;a=shortlog)

## Murmur

Notable changes to Murmur, the server component of Mumble.

  - Support for priority speakers / recording
  - Logs in Database can be switched off (murmur.ini: "logdays=-1")
  - Defaultchannel setting can be applied to registered users
    (murmur.ini: "rememberchannel=false")
  - Ice interface changes:
      - getLogLen() function added to retrieve number of log entries
      - recording and priority_speaker flag added to user state
      - There are now separate [Ice](Ice "wikilink") secrets for read
        and write operations

[Category:Documentation
English](Category:Documentation_English "wikilink")
[Category:Releases](Category:Releases "wikilink")