Version 1.2.9 is a maintenance release in the stable 1.2-series of
Mumble and the successor of Mumble [1.2.8](1.2.8 "wikilink").

### Summary

This release contains a couple of bug fixes to the Mumble client and
contains updates to various Mumble dependencies, most prominently
OpenSSL (1.0.1n) and Qt 4.8 (latest from Git). It is also the first
release in the 1.2.x series that enables TLS 1.2 and modern TLS cipher
suites.

If you are using one our packaged static Murmur servers, or Murmur on
Windows, or any of our packaged Mumble client packages we advise you to
update to get the latest security fixes from our dependencies.

### Changes in this release:

  - OpenSSL has been updated to 1.0.1n.
  - Qt 4.8 has been synced to the latest sources from Git.
  - Mumble and Murmur now use TLS 1.2 if the server/client combination
    allows it.
  - Mumble and Murmur now prefer ECDHE + AES-GCM cipher suites if
    possible, providing Perfect Forward Secrecy.

For a source-level changelog, please see
<https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/compare/1.2.8>...1.2.9

All of these changes are already available in our snapshot builds (the
1.3.x series), so if you like living on the bleeding edge and want to
help out with Mumble development, feel free to check out our development
snapshots at <http://mumble.info/>.

The TLS 1.2 support in our binary packages is backported from Qt 5.
Unfortunately, that means that if you are using Mumble from a package
manager, you’re not going to get a TLS 1.2-enabled build.

Our backported patches to Qt 4 are available at:

<https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble-developers-qt/commit/a02610cf11395896bb0fd06725bc7545b80bd7fe>
<https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble-developers-qt/commit/2e23c3b6af5f820e56d08c7aad9129d74f609f40>

We do not advise distributions to pick up these patches as-is. In
particular, they change the meaning of QSsl::TlsV1 to mean ‘TLS 1.0 or
later’. This is not desirable to the vast majority of software out there
— but it works for Mumble’s binary packages. If there are any
distributions out there willing to carry this diff to their Qt 4
packages to allow TLS 1.2 support for Mumble 1.2.9, we’re willing to
prepare a more fitting patch to Qt 4.8 that implements the behavior of
“QSsl::TlsV1_0OrLater” from the upcoming Qt 5.5 release.

For this release, we’re also providing binaries on
[GitHub](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/releases/tag/1.2.9).

[Category:Documentation
English](Category:Documentation_English "wikilink")
[Category:Releases](Category:Releases "wikilink")