**This page contains only some highlighted changes. Please refer to the
[1.3.0 release
announcement](https://www.mumble.info/blog/mumble-1.3.0-release-announcement/)
instead.**

**Mumble 1.3.0** has been released 2019-08-08. You can download it from
our [Downloads page](https://www.mumble.info/downloads/).

Almost 10 years of development mean 1.3.0 has a LOT of changes.

## Improved user management

### User list

![Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_usermanagement.png](Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_usermanagement.png
"Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_usermanagement.png") To simplify the
administration of servers with a lot of users Mumble 1.3.0 ships with an
improved userlist manager in the client. The new manager displays nick,
time since the user was last seen\* as well as the channel the user was
last seen in\*. You can sort the display on all those values and apply
filtering by username and/or time since the user last joined the server
to quickly find the user you want to edit. The new interface allows
renaming users as well as (batch) deletions.

<small>\* requires server version \>=1.3.0</small>

### Renaming users

Renaming a user in the user list no longer requires the user to
disconnect and reconnect in order to use the new name.

## Improved banlist management

![Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_banlist.png](Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_banlist.png
"Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_banlist.png") With the improved banlist you can
add, search, view and edit existing bans much easier than in previous
versions of Mumble.



## Avatar handling

An admin can now remove the avatar of a user.

## Dynamic channel filtering

![Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_filter.gif](Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_filter.gif
"Screenshot_mumble_1.3.0_filter.gif") The dynamic channel filtering
feature enables you to effectively navigate big mumble servers with lots
of users and channels. You can toggle the filter by pressing the filter
icon in the icon bar or by pressing \[Ctrl+F\]. By default the filter
will hide all empty channels on the server from your channel tree.
Additionally you can right-click channels and add them to your explicit
filter list. If the dynamic filter is enabled channels on this list will
be hidden even if users are currently residing in them.

## Overlay

  - The [Mumble Overlay](Overlay "wikilink") now displays in more games,
    for example in Guild Wars 2.
  - Support for DirectX 11
  - An optional clock in the overlay
  - The position of the FPS counter and clock are now configurable (just
    like the user list)

## Audio

  - Mumble can be configured to locally lower volume of other users
    while you talk if you have the "Priority Speaker" status. This is
    off by default and can be enabled in Configure -\> Settings -\>
    Audio Output
  - Text to Speech on OS X has been updated to use the
    NSSpeechSynthesizer API (this allows TTS to work on Mavericks)
  - Multichannel recordings are synchronous even after several hours
  - Mumble shows who gave/removed whom [priority
    speaker](1.2.3#Priority_speaker "wikilink")
  - PulseAudio monitor devices can can be used as input devices
  - Updated [Opus
    to 1.2](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/issues/3139)

## Features

  - The output volume of individual users can now be adjusted locally
  - New bindable shortcut for changing transmission modes (voice
    activation, push to talk, continuous)
  - New optional toolbar entry to select transmission modes (voice
    activation, push to talk, continuous). Needs to be activated in
    Configure -\> Settings -\> User Interface -\> Show transmit mode
    dropdown in toolbar.
    ![<File:Mumble_1.3.0_toolbar_speech_open.png>](Mumble_1.3.0_toolbar_speech_open.png
    "File:Mumble_1.3.0_toolbar_speech_open.png")
  - Windows clients report full operating system string instead of only
    the version number. For example:
    ![<File:Mumble> 1.2.5
    userinformation.png](Mumble_1.2.5_userinformation.png
    "File:Mumble 1.2.5 userinformation.png")
  - Mumble does no longer cause the OS to feel laggy for some seconds
    upon starting

## Serverlist

Added two new settings related to the serverlist:

  - Option to disable add/edit in connect dialog
    This is meant to be used in occasions where the user isn't supposed
    to change the set list of favourite servers.
  - Option to disable public server list

Both settings can be set through configuration files only *(on Linux and
Mac OS X)*, within the Windows registry or in a mumble.ini (see [Mumble
Portable](Mumble_Portable "wikilink")).

## Skinning

  - There are new icons available for [skinning](Skinning "wikilink"):
      - self_comment.svg – the "set comment" button in the toolbar
      - filter_on.svg – activated channel filter in the toolbar
      - filter_off.svg – deacivated channel filter in the toolbar
      - priority_speaker.svg – the status icon for a user with priority
        speaker

<!-- end list -->

  - The official light and dark theme from the
    [mumble-theme](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble-theme)
    repository are now included

## Client RPC subcommand

The Mumble client can be controlled through SocketRPC. See
[here](RPC_subcommand "wikilink") for details.

## Logitech G-keys

Support for [Logitech G-keys](Logitech_G-keys "wikilink") has been
added. You may need to follow [the instructions
here](Logitech_G-keys "wikilink").

## Community contributions

Special thanks to our many contributors for this release. Specifically:

  - [askreet](https://github.com/askreet)
      - [Bindable shortcut for transmission modes](#Features "wikilink")
      - [Optional combobox for transmit mode selection in the
        toolbar](#Features "wikilink")
  - [dc6jgk](https://wiki.piratenpartei.de/Benutzer:Dc6jgk)
      - [Dynamic channel
        filtering](#Dynamic_channel_filtering "wikilink")
  - [Piratonym](http://github.com/Piratonym)
      - [Improvements of the "Priority Speaker"](#Audio "wikilink")
  - [zorgiepoo](https://github.com/zorgiepoo)
      - [Updated Text-To-Speech Mac OS X](#Audio "wikilink")
  - [Zuko](https://github.com/Zuko)
      - [Clock in the overlay](#Overlay "wikilink")
      - [Full operating system information for Windows
        clients](#Features "wikilink")
      - [Improved user management](#Improved_user_management "wikilink")
      - [Improved banlist
        management](#Improved_banlist_management "wikilink")
  - [Tim Cooper](https://github.com/bontibon)
      - [Rename users without the need of a
        reconnect](#Renaming_users "wikilink")
      - [Remove the avatar as an admin](#Avatar_handling "wikilink")
  - [Meisekimiu](https://github.com/meisekimiu)
      - [RPC subcommands](#Client_RPC_subcommand "wikilink") for the
        Mumble client
  - [BuddyButterfly](https://github.com/BuddyButterfly)
      - Allow Mumble to use PulseAudio monitor devices to be used as
        input

For a more detailed list of changes already in this release
\[<https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/compare/1.2.4>...master take a
look at our github repository.\]

[Category:Documentation
English](Category:Documentation_English "wikilink")
[Category:Releases](Category:Releases "wikilink")