As of version [1.2.0](1.2.0 "wikilink"), Mumble supports strong
encryption and authentication based on certificates instead of
passwords.

## Certificates

A certificate is essentially a digital signature which is used by Mumble
to identify and authenticate users, and can be used either alongside or
instead of passwords to register user accounts.

For more information about certificates, see the Wikipedia entries on
[Public key
Certificates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_key_certificate).

## Authentication Methods

There are three scenarios to authentication of a registered user in
Mumble now:

### No Password Set, Certificate in Client

If a client is registered to a user name by another user (or themselves,
if privileges allow) from inside the Mumble client (by right clicking on
the user, or themselves, and clicking "Register"), the account is
created with no password but the certificate is connected to that
account and only a user with that certificate will be able to connect as
that user. **This is probably the most common case**, especially if no
[external user management](3rd_Party_Applications "wikilink") is being
used.

If no password is set, and the user connects from a Mumble installation
that does not have their matching certificate, they will not be able to
use that account. See
[below](#Replacing_Lost_or_Expired_Certificates "wikilink").

### Password Set, Certificate in Client

If your client has a certificate in it, and you log into an account that
has a password on it for the first time, then you will be prompted for a
password. Once the correct password is entered, the certificate is
attached to that account on the server - any user connecting from that
same client certificate will not need a password from that point on.

### Password Set, No Certificate in Client

If a user's account is created using an external administration program,
a password set, and they have not created a certificate in their client,
then Mumble will pretty much just authenticate as with 1.1.x and
earlier. The password is not saved, and must be entered every time you
connect.

As of 1.2.1, Mumble will always automatically generate a certificate,
even if you terminate the certificate wizard - so this scenario is
increasingly unlikely.

There's still no way to set a password for an account other than
SuperUser from Mumble or Murmur itself - you'll need an [administration
package](3rd_Party_Applications "wikilink") to do that. If you don't
have one, the next scenario is much more likely.

## Replacing Lost or Expired Certificates

As stated in the last scenario, if you replace your certificate for some
reason then the certificates will not match. If you have a strong
certificate (signed by a trusted certificate provider, such as StartSSL)
and the email address matches the old one, then the certificate will be
updated without a password being required.

If you have another certificate generated by Mumble, then you'll need
the password to the account to update your certificate on the server.
For this reason, if you're not using account passwords (say, you have no
[administration package](3rd_Party_Applications "wikilink") installed),
you'll want to make sure you backup your certificate and key and keep
them in a safe place.

## Getting a Strong Certificate

You can use a strong certificate with Mumble if you have one; you can
use commercial certificates as long as they are usable as both client
and server certificate. See our article on [obtaining a Comodo
Certificate](obtaining_a_Comodo_Certificate "wikilink") for an example
of a certification authority offering free certificates.

[Category:Documentation
English](Category:Documentation_English "wikilink")